hi this is pressure Locker consider two
trains that are hundred kilometers apart
if each train moves at 50 kilometers per
hour how quickly will the two trains
meet one way to solve this problem is by
considering the combined velocities of
the two trains we can add up 50 plus 50
to get a hundred kilometers per hour we
can then calculate the time it takes
them to meet by dividing the total
distance they travel by their combined
velocity this gives us a result of one
hour now consider a trickier variation
imagine each train is moving at 75
percent the speed of light so they're
going very very quickly how quickly will
the two trains meet one way to solve
this problem is we'll try adding up the
velocities will say that the two
velocities together will be 75 plus 75%
which equals a hundred and fifty percent
the speed of light so if you were an
observer on the Left train you would
actually see the observer on the right
train moving at fifty percent faster
than the speed of light and that's
something really bizarre because we know
that no object is going to move faster
than the speed of light so what's going
on here it's actually something very
tricky and it goes to the question of
how are we measuring time and speed so
imagine the train on the Left is moving
with velocity U and a train on the right
is moving with velocity V our question
is if you're an observer on the Left
train how quickly are you going to
perceive the right train to be moving
towards you to solve this problem we
want to use this special relativity
velocity addition formula for co-linear
movement this states the observer on the
Left train will view the right train as
moving at the speed of U plus V divided
by one plus u times V over C squared the
factor in the denominator is going to
give us a correction to make sure that
nothing travels faster than the speed of
light now you don't need to always use
this formula if your trains are moving
at say 50 kilometers per hour you can
actually just add up u plus V the reason
is that if the speed
you're dealing with are much slower than
the speed of light the denominator will
actually become approximately 1 because
the two speeds are very slow compared to
the speed of light so this formula will
actually reduce to just adding up the
two velocities u plus V so that's why
when we had 50 km/h you could actually
just add up the two velocities however
when the two speeds are much faster like
75 percent the speed of light you want
to make sure that the two velocities
don't add up to faster than the speed of
light so we can substitute in 75 percent
the speed of light and we'll see that an
observer on the Left train will see the
right train moving towards them at 0.96
the speed of light so things are very
tricky when you get closer to the speed
of light and special relativity deals
with this and part of the reason it
happens is because time actually changes
so in the rest of the video I'm going to
give you some intuition about special
relativity and try and give you some
sense of where this formula is coming
from so we'll start out with the thought
experiment a light clock is something
that consists of a mirror at the top and
then bottom mirror which is also a
sensor the distance between the mirrors
will be a length L from the bottom
mirror we're going to shine a beam of
light and it's going to bounce off the
top mirror and it's going to come back
and hit the sensor and that's going to
be one tick of the clock so each time
the light goes up and then comes down
that's one tick of the clock we go up
and down that's one tick of the clock
and again this is one tick of the clock
so the first question is how frequently
is this clock going to tick we can
calculate this by considering the
distance the light travels and dividing
by the speed of light the light is
traveling back and forth so one tick
distance will be 2 times the length
between the mirrors and then we divide
by the speed of light so we calculate
the time of one tick will be 2 times the
length divided by the speed of light now
let's make things interesting now let's
put this light clock in motion we're
going to be stationary and observing
someone that's moving with this light
o'clock at velocity V so you can imagine
that we're an observer outside and
someone is on a train that's moving with
velocity V and we're observing how we
perceive their light clock to be working
so the person who's on the train is
actually going to have this light clock
moving very normally the lights just
going to bounce off the Centers of the
mirrors and operate very normally but we
outside the Train are actually going to
see this light is moving in an apparent
path that's an upside-down V so let me
show you what I'm talking about when the
light clock is in motion this is the
path of light we're going to see the
light is actually balancing off the
mirror and it actually looks like it's
going in a V it's bouncing and then
bouncing down so we actually see that
the light is traveling a longer distance
than just going back and forth so this
is gonna change the perception of time
so let's look at the geometry of the
situation for one tick of the clock we
want to measure what's our perception of
the time that it takes for this light to
bounce off the merit and come back so
the light is bouncing off in an apparent
upside-down V shape and we want to
calculate the distance that that light
is traveling we can calculate the tick
of the clock by calculating the distance
the light travels divided by the speed
of light now an important assumption
here is that we're gonna assume the
speed of light is going to be the same
in all frames of reference so even
though that person is on a train moving
at velocity V that light is still gonna
move at the same speed of light so
what's the distance the light travels
well first we're you can calculate the
base of this triangle we know that the
train is moving for one tick delta T
Prime and it moves at a velocity V so
the entire base will be V times delta T
Prime so each of these legs will be
one-half of V times delta T Prime the
distance between the two mirrors is L
and now we can calculate the hypotenuse
of one of the triangles because this is
a right triangle by using the
Pythagorean theorem so the hypotenuse
will be the square root of the sum of
the squares of the legs and that will be
the same for both of the hypotenuse so
we now have the total distance traveled
by the
apparent to us and we can divide that by
the speed of light to measure our
perception of one tick of this clock we
can simplify the formula by solving for
delta T Prime and we'll get the delta T
prime equals to L over C divided by the
square root of 1 minus V squared over C
squared - L times C if you recall was
our formula for delta T so we've
actually created a relationship between
1 tick of the clock in motion and 1/2
the clock that was stationary in other
words one tick of the clock that's in
motion at velocity V will equal one tick
of the clock at stationary divided by
this correction factor we can say that 1
over the square root of 1 minus V
squared over C squared is this variable
gamma so we'll say the delta T prime
equals gamma times delta T now gamma V
of the velocity is equal to 0 gamma is
going to equal 1 that means the two
ticks of the clock will be the same if
the velocity is 0 however if velocity
gets to be more than zero then gamma
will be greater than 1 so we actually
have found that the time when you're
moving at velocity V is different than
the time when you're stationary you
multiply it by this variable gamma which
is also known as the Lorentz factor and
what we've deduced here is a phenomena
known as time dilation we will perceive
a clock that's in motion as moving
slower that one tick takes longer it
looks like the clock is actually running
slow what this means is that time is
actually moving slower as you go faster
it's not a mechanical error that the
clock has some problem with it it
actually is the case that the tick of
this light clock is going to be slow is
going to take longer and this is not
just a theoretical phenomenon in our
thought experiment this is actually
something that GPS has to take into
account for in their clocks as well as
other effects of relativity if they
didn't do this they would actually be
off by several kilometers every day so
now in order to get to the formula for
the addition of
Velocity's we're gonna have to go over
one more concept this is what happens
when you have a moving frame and you
want to change your coordinates so
imagine we have a frame of reference we
have some coordinates here and all we're
gonna care about is just the
x-coordinate what we're going to do is
imagine this coordinate system is going
to be put on a train that's moving at
velocity V so when you're on a train you
only care about things relative to the
train you might care about seats that
are in the front of the train or the
back of the Train you're not worried
that the train is moving under a
velocity V so you have a different
coordinate system that someone who's
outside the Train is going to say hey
that train is also moving away
I don't just care about the front in the
back of the Train I also care about
where the Train is relative to me so if
this train is moving you could have a
new set of coordinate system X Prime
that's going to be just relative to the
to the velocity of the train this
uniform velocity V and we want to know
how can you change between coordinates
of someone who's in the train and just
comparing coordinates locally inside the
train versus someone who's outside the
Train saying hey I know you have your
local coordinates but I also want to
compare the velocity that you're moving
so the classical way to do this is the
Galilean transformation you can get your
old coordinate systems as equaling the
local coordinate systems X prime plus V
times T Prime the other transformation
is the time is going to be equal to T
Prime what these two together are saying
is that velocities will add up together
and the time is absolute if you wanted
to change coordinates in the other
direction you would calculate for the
inverse operations now we know that
these things are not true
if you had velocities that would add you
would actually have speeds that go above
the speed of light and we also know that
time is not absolute because we just
showed with the time clock the time
dilation is a concept so we need to
correct for these change of coordinates
in a different way for special
relativity it's known as the Lorentz
transformation well hypothesize that
these two coordinate transformations
will look very similar to what we just
had except that we have this factor
a that's gonna be some adjustment for
time dilation and other things in
special relativity the inverse
transformation we're gonna assume is
going to look very similar so can we
figure out what K is if we assume these
are the change of coordinates well let's
do a thought experiment let's imagine we
have two frames of references that start
at the origin at the same time zero and
we're going to shine a beam of light
that's starting at time zero so let's
try and keep track of this beam of light
in our old coordinate system our core
our X values can equal the speed of
light times the time we travel similarly
in our new coordinate system it's also
going to be the speed of light times our
time that we keep in this coordinate
system T prime so we can substitute
these values into our assumed values for
the Lorentz transformation and we get
the following equations which we can
slightly simplify now we have two
equations and we can actually solve for
K by eliminating T and T Prime
we end up with the result that K is
equal to gamma or 1 divided by the
square root of 1 minus V squared over C
squared so this Lorentz factor that we
saw in time dilation actually comes out
in these Allura in this Lorentz
transformation that we're going to use
for a change of coordinates so we end up
with the result that these are the
change of coordinate systems when we're
using the Lorentz transformation and
there's a similar transformation for
time which I'm not going to drive in
this video but it also involves this
Lorentz factor so we assume these are
the Lorentz transformation we can now
come to our velocity addition formula so
let's imagine that an object moves at a
relative speed of U Prime in a frame
that's moving at a speed of V so one way
to interpret this is let's imagine
you're on a train moving at speed of V
and you are on that train and you are
moving at some speed you're walking
forward at a speed relative to the train
you prime how are you going to add up u
Prime and V how is someone on the outs
gonna see your speed because you're
walking and the train is also moving so
that's the question we want to answer so
what is the speed of the observers to
someone in a stationary frame how can we
add up u Prime and V Prime and V so in
our notation of the coordinate
transformations we have that u prime is
equal to DX prime over DT Prime that's
our speed in our local coordinate system
and what we want is we want that's the
speed in the old coordinate system which
will be DX over DT we can derive this by
taking differentials and dividing from
our Lorentz transformation so we'll take
the differential of our X transformation
we'll take the differential over T
transformation now we'll take the
quotient of these two and now we'll
divide by DT Prime now we have DX prime
over DT Prime in the numerator and
denominator which we can substitute
which equals u prime so the result we
end up with is a DX over DT is equal to
u prime plus V divided by 1 plus V times
u prime over C squared and this is
exactly the velocity addition formula I
presented at the beginning of the video
in order to add up the two velocities we
add up the velocities but then we have
this correction factor to make sure that
the two velocities don't add up faster
than the speed of light so special
relativity has some very interesting
implications for how we can observe time
and how we observe speed thanks for
watching this video please subscribe to
my channel I make videos on math and
game theory you can catch me on my blog
mind your decisions which you can follow
on Facebook Google+ and patreon you can
catch me on social media app rush to
Walker and if you like this video please
check out my books through links in the
video description